[GSoC contribution] Topological sort notebook (#44)
networkx/nx-guides: content/algorithms/dag/index.md

---
jupytext:
  notebook_metadata_filter: all
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.11.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: Python 3
  language: python
  name: python3
language_info:
  codemirror_mode:
    name: ipython
    version: 3
  file_extension: .py
  mimetype: text/x-python
  name: python
  nbconvert_exporter: python
  pygments_lexer: ipython3
  version: 3.9.2
---

# Directed Acyclic Graphs

In this tutorial, we'll explore the algorithms related to directed acyclic graph

> (or a "dag" as it is sometimes called) implemented in networkx under `networkx/algorithms/dag.py`.

Reviewer: By @rossbar: Maybe at the beginning of the notebook show how to construct DAGs and non-DAGs to help illustrate the concept using NetworkX. Some code cells to create the graph and quickly show properties.

#### Example

**TODO: Create Professor Bumstead clothing graph**

#### Definition

Directed acyclic graph ("DAG" or "dag") is a directed graph with no directed cycles.
That is, it consists of vertices and edges (also called arcs), with each edge directed from one vertex to another,
such that following those directions will never form a closed loop.

> A directed graph is a DAG if and only if it can be topologically ordered,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A directed graph is a DAG if and only if it can be topologically ordered
```

# draw `triangle_graph`
nx.draw_planar(triangle_graph,
    with_labels=True,
    node_size=1000,
    node_color="#ffff8f",
    width=0.8,
    font_size=14,
)
```

### Definition

In mathematics, and more specifically in graph theory,
a directed graph (or DiGraph) is a graph that is made up of a set of vertices
connected by directed edges often called arcs.

## Directed Acyclic Graph

### Example

```{code-cell} ipython3
# load Professor Bumstead clothing graph
clothing_graph = nx.read_graphml(f"data/clothing_graph.graphml")
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
# set figure size
plt.figure(figsize=(12, 12), dpi=150)

# draw `clothing_graph`
nx.draw_planar(clothing_graph,
    arrowsize=12,
    with_labels=True,
    node_size=8000,
    node_color="#ffff8f",
    linewidths=2.0,
    width=1.5,
    font_size=14,
)
```

Here is an example that arises when Professor Bumstead gets dressed in the morning.
The professor must do certain garments before others (e.g., socks before shoes).
Other items may be put on in any order (e.g., socks and pants).

A directed edge $(u, v)$ in the example indicates that garment $u$
must be donned before garment $v$.

For example, the `clothing_graph` is a DAG.

> ```{code-cell} ipython3
> # check if the `clothing_graph` is DAG
> print(nx.is_directed_acyclic_graph(clothing_graph))
> ```

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion
```{code-cell} ipython3
nx.is_directed_acyclic_graph(clothing_graph)
```
````

A few suggestions that are more opinions than anything else, so feel free to ignore:
 1. I think the comments in these sections are not really necessary, as they are basically restatements of the text above the code cell. IMO the comments actually impede the flow of the notebook as the reader ends up reading essentially the same thing twice in a row.
 2. The `print` function is unnecessary for the output to render since these are notebooks, so I have a slight preference for removing the explicit call to print. Removing nested function calls helps keep the focus on the `nx` function itself.

As mentioned - feel free to ignore these as they are only very minor suggestions. If you do decide to accept them however, note that these suggestions also apply to the code blocks below!

for systems of tasks with ordering constraints.
An important class of problems of this type concern collections of objects that need to be updated,
such as the cells of a spreadsheet after one of the cells has been changed,
or the object files of a piece of computer software after its source code has been changed.
In this context, a dependency graph is a graph that has a vertex for each object to be updated,
and an edge connecting two objects whenever one of them needs to be updated earlier than the other.
A cycle in this graph is called a circular dependency, and is generally not allowed,
because there would be no way to consistently schedule the tasks involved in the cycle.
Dependency graphs without circular dependencies form DAGs.

A directed acyclic graph may be used to represent a network of processing elements.
In this representation, data enters a processing element through its incoming edges
and leaves the element through its outgoing edges.
For instance, in electronic circuit design, static combinational logic blocks
can be represented as an acyclic system of logic gates that computes a function of an input,

> where the input and output of the function are represented as individual bits.

Reviewer 2: This is a really nice example that highlights the *directed* part of the graph, but is there something more specific in circuit design to highlight the *acyclic* part? In my experience, feedback plays an important part in circuit design, so it might not be the best fit to highlight directed *acyclic* graphs --- unless you had a specific design in mind where cycles are expressly prohibited.

### Definition

Directed acyclic graph ("DAG" or "dag") is a directed graph with no directed cycles.
That is, it consists of vertices and edges (also called arcs), with each edge directed from one vertex to another,
such that following those directions will never form a closed loop.

A directed graph is a DAG if and only if it can be topologically ordered
by arranging the vertices as a linear ordering that is consistent with all edge directions.

> ## Topological sort
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Topological sort

Let's now introduce what the topological sort is.
```

### Example

```{code-cell} ipython3
# get a topological sort of a dag
print(list(nx.topological_sort(clothing_graph)))
```

### Applications

The canonical application of topological sorting is in scheduling a sequence of jobs
or tasks based on their dependencies.
The jobs are represented by vertices, and there is an edge from $u$ to $v$
if job $u$ must be completed before job $v$ can be started
(for example, when washing clothes, the washing machine must finish before we put the clothes in the dryer).
Then, a topological sort gives an order in which to perform the jobs.

A closely related application of topological sorting algorithms

> was first studied in the early 1960s in the context of the PERT technique for scheduling in project management.

Reviewer 2: It's always good to fully introduce an acronym the first time you use it. In this case, a link to the PERT wiki would be sufficient I think:

```suggestion
was first studied in the early 1960s in the context of the [PERT technique](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Program_evaluation_and_review_technique) for scheduling in project management.
```

and the edges represent tasks that must be performed between one milestone and another.
Topological sorting forms the basis of linear-time algorithms for finding
the critical path of the project, a sequence of milestones and tasks that controls
the length of the overall project schedule.

In computer science, applications of this type arise in instruction scheduling,
ordering of formula cell evaluation when recomputing formula values in spreadsheets,
logic synthesis, determining the order of compilation tasks to perform in makefiles,
data serialization, and resolving symbol dependencies in linkers.
It is also used to decide in which order to load tables with foreign keys in databases.

### Definition

A topological sort of a directed acyclic graph $G = (V, E)$ is a linear ordering of all its vertices
such that if $G$ contains an edge $(u, v)$, then $u$ appears before $v$ in the ordering.

It is worth noting that if the graph contains a cycle, then no linear ordering is possible.

It is useful to view a topological sort of a graph as an ordering of its vertices
along a horizontal line so that all directed edges go from left to right.

> ### Kahn's algorithm
> 
> First, find a list of "start nodes" which have no incoming edges and insert them into a set S;
> at least one such node must exist in a non-empty acyclic graph. Then:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Kahn's algorithm

NetworkX uses Kahn's algorithm to perform topological sorting.
We will introduce it briefly here.

First, find a list of "start nodes" which have no incoming edges and insert them into a set S;
at least one such node must exist in a non-empty acyclic graph. Then:
```

```
L <- Empty list that will contain the sorted elements
S <- Set of all nodes with no incoming edge

while S is not empty do
    remove a node n from S
    add n to L
    for each node m with an edge e from n to m do
        remove edge e from the graph
        if m has no other incoming edges then
            insert m into S

if graph has edges then
    return error  # graph has at least one cycle
else 
    return L  # a topologically sorted order

> ```

Reviewer 2: Pseudocode is okay, but a working (and readable) Python implementation would be preferable!

### Asymptotics

The usual algorithms for topological sorting have running time linear
in the number of nodes plus the number of edges, asymptotically,

> $\mathcal{O}(|V| + |E|)$.

Reviewer: Concluding with the Asymptotics section feels a bit abrupt. 

I think there are two questions I'd like to ask, @vdshk.

Firstly, what's the purpose of including asymptotics here? 

Secondly, is there something a bit more substantial that you think could be useful for concluding the notebook?

Reviewer 2: > Secondly, is there something a bit more substantial that you think could be useful for concluding the notebook?

One thought - how about a step-through demonstration of NetworkX's implementation of `topological_sort` (or more likely `topological_generations`, which actually does the work) with a simple DAG example --- an obvious candidate would be the Professor Bumstead DAG.

    add N to L
    for each node M with an edge E from N to M do
        remove edge E from the graph
        if M has no other incoming edges then
            insert M into S

if graph has edges then
    return error  # graph has at least one cycle
else 
    return L  # a topologically sorted order
```

### NetworkX implementation

Finally, let's take a look at how the topological sorting is implemented in NetworkX.

We can see that Kahn's algorithm _stratifies_ the graph such that each level contains all the nodes
whose dependencies have been satisfied by the nodes in a previous level.
In other words, Kahn's algorithm does something like:
  - Take all the nodes in the DAG that don't have any dependencies and put them in list.
  - "Remove" those nodes from the DAG.
  - Repeat the process, creating a new list at each step.
Thus, topological sorting is reduced to correctly stratifying the graph in this way.

This procedure is implemented in the `topological_generations()` function, on which the `topological_sort()` function is based.

Let's see how the `topological_generations()` function is implemented in NetworkX step by step.

#### Step 1. Initialize indegrees.

> Since in Kahn's algorithm we are only interested in the indegrees of the vertices,
> instead of removing the edges, we will decrease the indegree of the corresponding vertex.

Reviewer: I have a phrasing change that may help a bit. Let me know what you think:

```suggestion
Since in Kahn's algorithm we are only interested in the indegrees of the vertices,
in order to preserve the structure of the graph as it is passed in,
instead of removing the edges, we will decrease the indegree of the corresponding vertex.
```

Therefore, we will save these values in a separate _dictionary_ `indegree_map`.

```
indegree_map = {v: d for v, d in G.in_degree() if d > 0}
```

#### Step 2. Initialize first level.

> At each step of the Kahn's algorithm, the current level consists of vertices with an indegree equal to zero.
> But the first such level(`zero_indegree`) must be initialized in advance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At each step of Kahn's algorithm, we seek out vertices with an in-degree of zero.
In preparation for the first loop iteration of the algorithm,
we can initialize a list called `zero_indegree` that houses these nodes:
```

```
zero_indegree = [v for v, d in G.in_degree() if d == 0]
```

#### Step 3. Move from one level to the next.

> The main part of the algorithm is to move from one level to the next.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, we will show how the algorithm moves from one level to the next.
```

> Until the current level(`zero_indegree`) is empty, we generate the next one.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside the loop, the first generation to be considered (`this_generation`)
is the collection of nodes that have zero in-degrees.
```

We process all the vertices of the current level in variable `this_generation`
and we store the next level in variable `zero_degree`.

> For each vertex from the current level(`this_generation`), we remove all of its outgoing edges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each vertex inside `this_generation`,
we remove all of its outgoing edges.
```

> If the input degree of some vertex is zeroed, then we add it to the next level
> and remove it from the `indegree_map` dictionary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, if the input degree of some vertex is zeroed as a result,
then we add it to the next level `zero_indegree` 
and remove it from the `indegree_map` dictionary.
```

> After we have processed the current level(`this_generation`), we can yield it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After we have processed all of the nodes inside `this_generation`, we can yield it.
```

```
while zero_indegree:
    this_generation = zero_indegree
    zero_indegree = []
    for node in this_generation:
        for child in G.neighbors(node):
            indegree_map[child] -= 1

            if indegree_map[child] == 0:
                zero_indegree.append(child)
                del indegree_map[child]

    yield this_generation
```

#### Step 4. Check if there is a cycle in the graph.

> If, after the operation of the main cycle, there are still vertices in the graph, then there is a cycle in it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If, after completing the loop there are still vertices in the graph, then there is a cycle in it and the graph is not a DAG.
```

```
if indegree_map:
    raise nx.NetworkXUnfeasible(
        "Graph contains a cycle or graph changed during iteration"
    )
```

> #### Addendum: Topological sort works on multigraphs as well.

Reviewer: This addendum could be phrased a bit more reader-friendly. At the moment, it reads more like a collection of bullet points.

It's getting late on my side, but I am thinking of something along the lines of:

"This is possible to do by slightly modifying the algorithm above. Firstly, ... Then, ... "

It is useful to view a topological sort of a graph as an ordering of its vertices
along a horizontal line so that all directed edges go from left to right.

### Kahn's algorithm

NetworkX uses Kahn's algorithm to perform topological sorting.
We will introduce it briefly here.

First, find a list of "start nodes" which have no incoming edges and insert them into a set S;
at least one such node must exist in a non-empty acyclic graph. Then:

```
L <- Empty list that will contain the sorted elements
S <- Set of all nodes with no incoming edge

while S is not empty do
    remove a node N from S
    add N to L
    for each node M with an edge E from N to M do
        remove edge E from the graph
        if M has no other incoming edges then
            insert M into S

if graph has edges then
    return error  # graph has at least one cycle
else 
    return L  # a topologically sorted order
```

### NetworkX implementation

Finally, let's take a look at how the topological sorting is implemented in NetworkX.

We can see that Kahn's algorithm _stratifies_ the graph such that each level contains all the nodes
whose dependencies have been satisfied by the nodes in a previous level.

> What this translates to is, take all the nodes in the DAG that don't have any dependencies and put them in list.
> Then "remove" those nodes from the DAG, and repeat the process, creating a new list at each step.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In other words, the general procedure looks something like:
 - Take all the nodes in the DAG that don't have any dependencies and put them in list.
 - "Remove" those nodes from the DAG.
 - Repeat the process, creating a new list at each step.
```

Just a suggestion to make the procedure more digestible. You could consider an enumerated list too, or feel free to ignore entirely!

Thus, topological sorting is reduced to correctly stratifying the graph in this way.

> And this is how the `topological_generations()` function works, on which the `topological_sort()` function is based.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This procedure is implemented in the `topological_generations()` function, on which the `topological_sort()` function is based.
```

Until the current level(`zero_indegree`) is empty, we generate the next one.

We process all the vertices of the current level in variable `this_generation`
and we store the next level in variable `zero_degree`.

For each vertex from the current level(`this_generation`), we remove all of its outgoing edges.

If the input degree of some vertex is zeroed, then we add it to the next level
and remove it from the `indegree_map` dictionary.

After we have processed the current level(`this_generation`), we can yield it.

```
while zero_indegree:
    this_generation = zero_indegree
    zero_indegree = []
    for node in this_generation:
        for child in G.neighbors(node):
            indegree_map[child] -= 1

            if indegree_map[child] == 0:
                zero_indegree.append(child)
                del indegree_map[child]

    yield this_generation
```

#### Step 4. Graph contains a cycle.

If, after the operation of the main cycle, there are still vertices in the graph, then there is a cycle in it.

```
if indegree_map:
    raise nx.NetworkXUnfeasible(
        "Graph contains a cycle or graph changed during iteration"
    )
```

> #### Addition 1. Topological sort is defined only on directed graphs.
> 
> ```
> if not G.is_directed():
>     raise nx.NetworkXError("Topological sort not defined on undirected graphs.")
> ```
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
I think we can safely exclude this addendum, given the excellent description of the algorithm and the focus on DAGs in the first half of the notebook :)

> #### Addition 2. Topological sort works on multigraphs as well.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Addendum: Topological sort works on multigraphs as well.
```

I have a slight preference for removing (non-automatic) enumeration, as it is easy to forget to update it if the notebook changes (and the sections are linkable so navigation/organization in the html should be very straightforward).

The change from "Addition" to "Addendum" is just a suggestion - feel free to ignore or perhaps consider another term like "Appendix"

#### Combine all steps.

```{code-cell} ipython3
def topological_generations(G):
    if not G.is_directed():
        raise nx.NetworkXError("Topological sort not defined on undirected graphs.")

    multigraph = G.is_multigraph()
    indegree_map = {v: d for v, d in G.in_degree() if d > 0}
    zero_indegree = [v for v, d in G.in_degree() if d == 0]

    while zero_indegree:
        this_generation = zero_indegree
        zero_indegree = []
        for node in this_generation:
            if node not in G:
                raise RuntimeError("Graph changed during iteration")
            for child in G.neighbors(node):
                try:
                    indegree_map[child] -= len(G[node][child]) if multigraph else 1
                except KeyError as e:
                    raise RuntimeError("Graph changed during iteration") from e
                if indegree_map[child] == 0:
                    zero_indegree.append(child)
                    del indegree_map[child]
        yield this_generation

    if indegree_map:
        raise nx.NetworkXUnfeasible(
            "Graph contains a cycle or graph changed during iteration"
        )

> ```

Reviewer 2: Rather than manually copy over the current implementation, it would be good if we could link to it instead in case it ends up changing. Two ideas for how to do this are:
 - Use GitHub, e.g. https://github.com/networkx/networkx/blob/main/networkx/algorithms/dag.py#L105-L179 (note that the `blob/main` part of the URL will guarantee that this link always points to the development version)
 - Try to find a way to render the source code directly in the notebook. E.g. in the normal notebook interface you could do `nx.topological_generations??`, but I don't think that will work in the html (worth a try though).
